update latex formula (#2584)
huggingface/blog: vdr-2b-multilingual.md

---
title: "Visual Document Retrieval Goes Multilingual" 
thumbnail: /blog/assets/vdr-2b-multilingual/thumbnail.png
authors:
- user: marco
  guest: true
  org: llamaindex
- user: cheesyFishes
  guest: true
  org: llamaindex
---

> # Visual Document Retrieval Goes Multilingual

Reviewer: In my experience, you only have a tiny window to convince your reader to actually keep reading a blogpost. Because of that, I think it's valuable to have a "Too long; didn't read" section at the beginning that tells you exactly what to expect. So, here is a draft.

```suggestion
# TL;DR
We introduce [`vdr-2b-multi-v1`](https://huggingface.co/llamaindex/vdr-2b-multi-v1), a multilingual embedding model for visual document retrieval, and [`vdr-2b-v1`](https://huggingface.co/llamaindex/vdr-2b-v1), its monolingual English twin. Additionally, we open source the new [`vdr-multilingual-train`](https://huggingface.co/datasets/llamaindex/vdr-multilingual-train) dataset, which is the largest open source synthetic dataset for multimodal visual document retrieval with 500k query-image samples.

In this blogpost, we describe the models, training & testing dataset, as well as the entire training pipeline. We show multilingual and cross-lingual evaluations, including results when applying Matryoshka truncation and Binary Quantization: two approaches for increasing retrieval speed.

# Visual Document Retrieval Goes Multilingual
```

I also want to reiterate: I see that we have a lot of review suggestions, but you don't have to accept them all. You're still the boss over the blogpost. If you don't like something, you don't have to add it.

![image/png](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/vdr-2b-multilingual/cover.png)

Introducing vdr-2b-multi-v1 [(🤗)](https://huggingface.co/llamaindex/vdr-2b-multi-v1), a multilingual embedding model designed for visual document retrieval across multiple languages and domains. This model is designed to encode document page screenshots into dense single-vector representations, this will effectively allow to search and query visually rich multilingual documents without the need for any OCR, data extraction pipelines, chunking...

> vdr-2b-multi-v1 is based on [MrLight/dse-qwen2-2b-mrl-v1](https://huggingface.co/MrLight/dse-qwen2-2b-mrl-v1) and is trained on an extensive self-made dataset of multilingual query-image pairs. This model is built in collaboration with LlamaIndex and is the next iteration of [mcdse-2b-v1](https://huggingface.co/marco/mcdse-2b-v1). vdr-2b-multi-v1 extends and improves the learning and methods used to train it, resulting in a much more powerful and better model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `vdr-2b-multi-v1` model is based on [MrLight/dse-qwen2-2b-mrl-v1](https://huggingface.co/MrLight/dse-qwen2-2b-mrl-v1) and is trained on an extensive self-made dataset of multilingual query-image pairs. This model is built in collaboration with LlamaIndex and is the next iteration of [mcdse-2b-v1](https://huggingface.co/marco/mcdse-2b-v1). Our `vdr-2b-multi-v1` extends and improves the learning and methods used to train it, resulting in a much more powerful and better model.
```
This is all a bit nit-picky, but I prefer not starting sentences with the model name if it's all lowercase.

- **Trained on 🇮🇹 Italian, 🇪🇸 Spanish, 🇬🇧 English, 🇫🇷 French and 🇩🇪 German:** together they form a new large, open-source, multilingual training dataset of 500k high-quality samples.

> - **Low VRAM and Faster Inference**: english model achieves better results on synthetic vidore benchmarks with just 30% of the base model image resolution. This results in 3x faster inference and much lower VRAM usage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Low VRAM and Faster Inference**: The model achieves better results on English synthetic Visual Document Retrieval (ViDoRe) benchmarks than alternatives, even with just 30% of the base model image resolution. This results in 3x faster inference and much lower VRAM usage.
```
I think this is roughly what you're trying to say @Marplex? It wasn't extremely clear to me.

> - **Low VRAM and Faster Inference**: english model achieves better results on synthetic vidore benchmarks with just 30% of the base model image resolution. This results in 3x faster inference and much lower VRAM usage.

Author: The finetuned model evaluated with 768 image patches is better than the base model evaluated with 2560 image patches on ViDoRe synthetic benchmarks. Should be more clear in the new version

> - **Cross-lingual Retrieval**: substantially better on real-world scenarios. For example, this allows for searching german documents with italian queries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Cross-lingual Retrieval**: Substantially better on real-world scenarios. For example, you can search for German documents with Italian queries.
```

> - **Matryoshka Representation Learning**: You can reduce the vectors size 3x and still keep 98% of the embeddings quality.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Matryoshka Representation Learning**: You can reduce the vectors size 3x and still keep 98% of the embeddings quality. This allows for notably faster retrieval speeds while reducing storage costs.
```
It's always nice to mention why Matryoshka truncation is so nice. You can refer to our previous blogpost on Matryoshka embeddings if you want to clarify for users, but don't feel pressured to: https://huggingface.co/blog/matryoshka

## Training dataset
Training good single-vector models for visual document retrieval requires high-quality data, but the current multimodal off-the-shelf datasets are very scarce and not multilingual.

> So, I've spent a lot of time building it from scratch. The raw dataset consists of 500k multilingual query image samples, collected and generated from scratch using public internet pdfs. The queries associated with each image are synthetic and generated using VLMs. For comparison, it has 10x more samples than the largest open source synthetic dataset for multimodal visual document ir (colpali trainset scrapped documents).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
So, we've spent a lot of time building it from scratch. The raw dataset consists of 500k multilingual query image samples, collected and generated from scratch using public internet pdfs. The queries associated with each image are synthetic and generated using VLMs. For comparison, it has 10x more samples than the largest open source synthetic dataset for multimodal visual document ir (colpali trainset scrapped documents).
```

Small nit, I think it should come from the company and not for an individual. Also I did not quite understand this part `visual document ir (colpali trainset scrapped documents).` is there any typo (apologies if I am missing something)

> So, I've spent a lot of time building it from scratch. The raw dataset consists of 500k multilingual query image samples, collected and generated from scratch using public internet pdfs. The queries associated with each image are synthetic and generated using VLMs. For comparison, it has 10x more samples than the largest open source synthetic dataset for multimodal visual document ir (colpali trainset scrapped documents).

Reviewer: Beyond @ariG23498's suggestion, I also have some nits:
```suggestion
So, we've spent a lot of time building it from scratch. The raw dataset consists of 500k multilingual query-image samples, collected and generated from scratch using public internet PDFs. The queries associated with each image are synthetic and generated using VLMs. For comparison, our dataset has 10x more samples than the prior largest open source synthetic dataset for multimodal visual document retrieval, i.e. the scrapped documents generated for the [ColPali training dataset](https://huggingface.co/datasets/vidore/colpali_train_set).
```
P.s. we don't have to link to the ColPali dataset, we can also link to the paper or not even link at all.

![image/png](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/vdr-2b-multilingual/datapipeline.png)

#### Data gathering

> For each language, I generate a long list of search queries covering many different topics, which are then used to search for PDFs. I use the language filtering capabilities of the search engine to scrape documents that are only in the specified language. This "search by topic" technique ensures that the model has seen a lot of diverse topics and domains, and that it performs well in real life scenarios.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For each language, we generate a long list of search queries covering many different topics, which are then used to search for PDFs. We use the language filtering capabilities of the search engine to scrape documents that are only in the specified language. This "search by topic" technique ensures that the model has seen a lot of diverse topics and domains, and that it performs well in real life scenarios.
```

Same comment for individual vs company. Feel free to ignore.

The scraping process produced ~50k multilingual documents. Contrary to the method used in the previous mcdse-2b-v1 model, pages were not extracted randomly. Instead, each page of each PDF was run through a document layout analysis model to determine whether the page contained more textual or visual elements. The result is a number that classifies the page as text-only, visual-only or mixed. This labelling step was then used to sample ~100k pages, ensuring they were evenly distributed by page type.

#### Synthetic generation

> The queries were then generated using gemini-1.5-pro and Qwen2-VL-72B. They were tasked to come up with a specific and a general question. Only the specific question is then used to train the model, but forcing it to distinguish between the two often made the specific questions better for information retrieval tasks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The queries were then generated using gemini-1.5-pro and Qwen2-VL-72B. They were tasked to come up with a specific and a general question. Only the specific question is then used to train the model, but forcing it to distinguish between the two often made the specific questions better for information retrieval tasks.
```

I don't think I'm following here. By "distinguish", do you mean during training? e.g. a contrastive loss?

Author: I tested query generation with two prompts:
1) The prompt tells the model to generate a generic and specific question
2) The prompt tells the model to generate a specific question

The specific questions generated with the first prompt were often better for IR. I think this is because it generates a generic question first, and then the specific one that comes after is more specific/granular thanks to the previous generic self-generated example.

Reviewer: Oh, that's awesome! Do you think something like this is a bit clearer about it? 

```suggestion
The queries were then generated using gemini-1.5-pro and Qwen2-VL-72B. They were tasked to come up with a specific and a general question. Only the specific question is then used to train the model, but forcing the LLM to distinguish between the two often resulted in stronger specific questions for information retrieval training.
```

After generation, a further cleaning step ensures that the questions are good enough for training. This includes:

- Ensuring the language is correct
- Fix formatting problems
- Remove markdown
- Ensuring that only one question is posed
- Removing grounding phrases (e.g. "according to Figure 1", "this document", ...)

#### Filtering and hard-negative mining

This cleaning step ensures that the queries are syntactically correct and follow some strict guidelines. But it still doesn't ensure that the queries are good enough for information retrieval.

> To filter out bad questions, I have embedded and indexed each broad query with the voyage-3 model. For each specific question, I search the index. The query is marked as 'good' if its associated broad question appears in the top 100 results. This method removes low entropy, duplicate or too similar questions. On average, 40% of queries were removed from each language dataset.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To filter out bad questions, we have embedded and indexed each broad query with the voyage-3 model. For each specific question, we search the index. The query is marked as 'good' if its associated broad question appears in the top 100 results. This method removes low entropy, duplicate or too similar questions. On average, 40% of queries were removed from each language dataset.
```

Hard negatives were then mined using voyage-3 only on specific questions with a fixed threshold of 0.75. Experiments were also carried out using positive aware negative mining as described in [nvidia/NV-Retriever-v1](https://huggingface.co/nvidia/NV-Retriever-v1), but on this dataset it seems to produce too easy/distant negatives.

### Download

> The training ([vdr-multilingual-train 🤗](https://huggingface.co/datasets/llamaindex/vdr-multilingual-train)) dataset is now open-source and directly available on HuggingFace. The training dataset is comprised of 496,167 unfiltered query->image pairs. Almost 40% of the queries were filtered out using the method described above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ([vdr-multilingual-train 🤗](https://huggingface.co/datasets/llamaindex/vdr-multilingual-train)) training dataset is now open-source and directly available on Hugging Face. The training dataset is comprised of 496,167 unfiltered query-image pairs. Almost 40% of the queries were filtered out using the method described above.
```

Question: when running the script below, do users get the filtered or the unfiltered data? Or both somehow?

Author: Should be more clear now. You get 496167 images, where only 280679 have the filtered queries. The remaining images are still used as hard-negatives

|  Language | # filtered queries | # unfiltered queries |
|----------:|-------------------:|---------------------:|
|   English |             53,512 |               94,225 |
|   Spanish |             58,738 |              102,685 |
|   Italian |             54,942 |               98,747 |
|    German |             58,217 |              100,713 |
|    French |             55,270 |               99,797 |
| **TOTAL** |        **280,679** |          **496,167** |

> The dataset is made of 5 different subsets, each for every language. You can download languages individually with:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The dataset is made of 5 different subsets, each for every language. You can download languages individually by specifying the language subset in [`load_dataset`](https://huggingface.co/docs/datasets/main/en/package_reference/loading_methods#datasets.load_dataset):
```

```python
from datasets import load_dataset

italian_dataset = load_dataset("llamaindex/vdr-multilingual-train", "it", split="train")

english_dataset = load_dataset("llamaindex/vdr-multilingual-train", "en", split="train")

french_dataset = load_dataset("llamaindex/vdr-multilingual-train", "fr", split="train")

german_dataset = load_dataset("llamaindex/vdr-multilingual-train", "de", split="train")

spanish_dataset = load_dataset("llamaindex/vdr-multilingual-train", "es", split="train")
```

> 

Reviewer: Once a dataset is public, it becomes possible to embed it in some Markdown or HTML. See for example the embedded dataset halfway through https://huggingface.co/blog/docmatix. I think that would be a great addition here as well. 

There's an `Embed` button on a dataset viewer to get the HTML snippet:
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/eb1c8da5-7257-4c6d-861c-44d5072fb20b)

It'll look something like this:
```html
<iframe
  src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/llamaindex/vdr-multilingual-train/embed/viewer/default/train"
  frameborder="0"
  width="100%"
  height="560px"
></iframe>
```
And yes, you can embed HTML in our blogposts like this 🤗

## Evaluations

![image/png](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/vdr-2b-multilingual/ndcgtop.png)

The model has been evaluated on the Vidore benchmark and on custom-built evaluation sets that allow testing its multilingual capabilities on text-only, visual-only and mixed page screenshots. The evaluation dataset is also publicly available on HuggingFace ([vdr-multilingual-test 🤗](https://huggingface.co/datasets/llamaindex/vdr-multilingual-test)).

> I made sure that no page in these datasets was also present in the training set to avoid any evaluation contamination. The datasets were collected and generated using the same methods as the training dataset, but with a smaller sample size. The filtering step was all done manually: each query is evaluated, curated and improved (if necessary) to ensure high data quality. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We made sure that no page in these datasets was also present in the training set to avoid any evaluation contamination. The datasets were collected and generated using the same methods as the training dataset, but with a smaller sample size. The filtering step was all done manually: each query is evaluated, curated and improved (if necessary) to ensure high data quality. 
```

All evaluations are performed by calculating **NDCG@5** scores using **1536 dimensions** vectors and an image resolution that can be represented with **maximum 768 tokens**. 

|                     | Avg      | Italian (text) | Italian (visual) | Italian (mix) |
|---------------------|----------|----------------|------------------|---------------|

> | dse-qwen2-2b-mrl-v1 |     95.1 |           95.1 |               94 |          96.2 |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| dse-qwen2-2b-mrl-v1 |     95.1 |           95.1 |             94.0 |          96.2 |
```
This is very nitpicky, but my scientific brain prefers `94.0` so it's absolutely clear that you're not rounding e.g. 94.4 or 93.6 to 94. If you want, you can make this change in all tables (there's a few places).

| dse-qwen2-2b-mrl-v1 |      96.7 |           97.2 |             94.7 |          98.2 |
| vdr-2b-multi-v1     |  **98.1** |       **98.3** |         **96.9** |      **99.1** |
|                     | **+1.4%** |                |                  |               |

|                     | Avg       | German (text) | German (visual) | German (mix) |
|---------------------|-----------|---------------|-----------------|--------------|
| dse-qwen2-2b-mrl-v1 |      93.0 |          93.4 |              90 |         95.5 |
| vdr-2b-multi-v1     |  **96.2** |      **94.8** |        **95.7** |     **98.1** |
|                     | **+3.4%** |               |                 |              |

|                     | Avg       | English (text) | English (visual) | English (mix) |
|---------------------|-----------|----------------|------------------|---------------|
| dse-qwen2-2b-mrl-v1 | 98.0      | **98.3**       | 98.5             | 97.1          |
| vdr-2b-multi-v1     | **98.1**  | 97.9           | **99.1**         | **97.3**      |
|                     | **+0.1%** |                |                  |               |

> The multilingual model outperforms the base model in every language and every page type, on average by +2.3%. On the vidore benchmark, it also performs slightly better (+0.5%). Although it still delivers very good NDCG@5 results, it's worth noting that the model performs worse on visual-only pages. However, this is also where the fine-tuned model improves the most, especially on German.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The multilingual model outperforms the base model in every language and every page type, on average by +2.3%. On the ViDoRe benchmark, it also performs slightly better (+0.5%). Although it still delivers very good NDCG@5 results, it's worth noting that the model performs worse on visual-only pages. However, this is also where the fine-tuned model improves the most, especially on German.
```
I think you're selling yourself short here: I would rather focus on the excellent performance on the mixed page type performance and still highlight the large jumps in visual page performance. The way this is written now sounds a bit negative.

Reviewer: Perhaps
```suggestion
The multilingual model outperforms the base model in every language and every page type, on average by +2.3%. On the vidore benchmark, it also performs slightly better (+0.5%). Our finetuned `vdr-2b-multi-v1` makes big jumps in performance, especially for visual-only or mixed pages for non-English languages. See for example the 6.33% NDCG@5 improvement for German visual-only retrieval over the base model.
```

> I also trained a version only on the English subset ([vdr-2b-v1 🤗](https://huggingface.co/llamaindex/vdr-2b-v1)). On the full Vidore benchmark (evaluated with 768 image tokens), both the multilingual and the english-only version performs better than the base model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We also trained a version only on the English subset ([vdr-2b-v1 🤗](https://huggingface.co/llamaindex/vdr-2b-v1)). On the full ViDoRe benchmark (evaluated with 768 image tokens), both the multilingual and the English-only version outperform the base model.
```

|                     | **Avg**  | **shiftproject** | **government** | **healthcare** | **energy** | **ai**   | **docvqa** | **arxivqa** | **tatdqa** | **infovqa** | **tabfquad** |
|---------------------|----------|------------------|----------------|----------------|------------|----------|------------|-------------|------------|-------------|--------------|
| dse-qwen2-2b-mrl-v1 | 83.6     | 79.8             | 95.7           | 96.9           | 92         | 98.2     | 56.3       | **85.2**    | 53.9       | 87.5        | 90.3         |
| vdr-2b-multi-v1     | 84.0     | 82.4             | 95.5           | 96.5           | 91.2       | **98.5** | **58.5**   | 84.7        | 53.6       | 87.1        | **92.2**     |
| vdr-2b-v1           | **84.3** | **83.4**         | **96.9**       | **97.2**       | **92.6**   | 96.8     | 57.4       | 85.1        | **54.1**   | **87.9**    | 91.3         |

> ![image/png](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/vdr-2b-multilingual/efficiency.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Performance with less image tokens

![image/png](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/vdr-2b-multilingual/efficiency.png)
```

Putting a header here makes the image a bit less "sudden", if that makes sense!

|                                         | Avg      | shiftproject | government | healthcare | energy   | ai       |
|-----------------------------------------|----------|--------------|------------|------------|----------|----------|
| dse-qwen2-2b-mrl-v1 (2560 image tokens) | 93.0     | 82           | 96         | 96.4       | **92.9** | **97.5** |
| vdr-2b-v1 (768 image tokens)            | **93.4** | **83.4**     | **96.9**   | **97.2**   | 92.6     | 96.8     |

> vdr-2b-v1 also matches the performance of the base model on the Vidore benchmark synthetic datasets, while only using 30% of the image tokens (768 vs. 2560). This results in 3x faster inference and much lower VRAM usage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `vdr-2b-v1` model also matches the performance of the base model on the ViDoRe benchmark synthetic datasets, while only using 30% of the image tokens (768 vs. 2560). This results in 3x faster inference and much lower VRAM usage.
```

|                       | **+4.6%** |                              |                                |                             |
| **_512 dimensions_**  |           |                              |                                |                             |
| dse-qwen2-2b-mrl-v1   | 79.2      | **80.6**                     | 81.7                           | 75.4                        |
| vdr-2b-multi-v1       | **82.6**  | 77.7                         | **86.7**                       | **83.3**                    |
|                       | **+4.0%** |                              |                                |                             |

1024 dimension float vectors offer a very good balance between quality and size. They are ~30% smaller but still retain 99% of the retrieval performance. This is also true for the 1536 dimensions binary vectors, which have 10x fewer bytes per vector but still retain 97% of their retrieval quality. It's also interesting to see that 1536 binary vectors almost match the performance of the base model 1536 float vectors.

## Usage

> Generating embeddings with vdr-2b-multi-v1 is easier than ever with SentenceTransformers and LlamaIndex direct integrations. Get started with just a few lines of code:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Generating embeddings with `vdr-2b-multi-v1` is easier than ever with SentenceTransformers and LlamaIndex direct integrations. Get started with just a few lines of code:
```

<details open>
<summary>
via LlamaIndex
</summary>

```bash
pip install -U llama-index-embeddings-huggingface
```

```python
from llama_index.embeddings.huggingface import HuggingFaceEmbedding

model = HuggingFaceEmbedding(
    model_name_or_path="llamaindex/vdr-2b-multi-v1",
    device="mps",
    trust_remote_code=True,
)

embeddings = model.get_image_embedding("image.png")
```

</details>

<details>
<summary>
via SentenceTransformers
</summary>

```python
from sentence_transformers import SentenceTransformer

model = SentenceTransformer(
    model_name_or_path="llamaindex/vdr-2b-multi-v1",
    device="mps",
    trust_remote_code=True,
    # These are the recommended kwargs for the model, but change them as needed
    model_kwargs={
        "torch_dtype": torch.bfloat16, 
        "device_map": "cuda:0", 
        "attn_implementation": "flash_attention_2"
    },
)

embeddings = model.encode("image.png")
```

</details>

## Next steps

> While vdr-2b-multi-v1 performs well for English and multilingual retrieval overall, future work will explore how the model performs when adapted to new and specific domains. This is still in the early stages of development and more work needs to be done before I can publish the results, but early tests already seem to suggest impressive retrieval gains with **very** minimal data and computational resources. Stay tuned for future updates!

Reviewer 3: I'd maybe reframe as "Conclusions and Next Steps", focusing on the gains we get right now, followed by the ideas for future work.

> While vdr-2b-multi-v1 performs well for English and multilingual retrieval overall, future work will explore how the model performs when adapted to new and specific domains. This is still in the early stages of development and more work needs to be done before I can publish the results, but early tests already seem to suggest impressive retrieval gains with **very** minimal data and computational resources. Stay tuned for future updates!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While `vdr-2b-multi-v1` performs well for English and multilingual retrieval overall, future work will explore how the model performs when adapted to new and specific domains. This is still in the early stages of development and more work needs to be done before we can publish the results, but early tests already seem to suggest impressive retrieval gains with **very** minimal data and computational resources. Stay tuned for future updates!
```

> While vdr-2b-multi-v1 performs well for English and multilingual retrieval overall, future work will explore how the model performs when adapted to new and specific domains. This is still in the early stages of development and more work needs to be done before I can publish the results, but early tests already seem to suggest impressive retrieval gains with **very** minimal data and computational resources. Stay tuned for future updates!

Reviewer: Right at the very end, it's common to put a section with all relevant links that you're trying to get people to go to, a bit like so:
```suggestion
While vdr-2b-multi-v1 performs well for English and multilingual retrieval overall, future work will explore how the model performs when adapted to new and specific domains. This is still in the early stages of development and more work needs to be done before I can publish the results, but early tests already seem to suggest impressive retrieval gains with **very** minimal data and computational resources. Stay tuned for future updates!

## Links
* [vdr-2b-multi-v1 model](https://huggingface.co/llamaindex/vdr-2b-multi-v1)
* [vdr-2b-v1](https://huggingface.co/llamaindex/vdr-2b-v1)
* [vdr-multilingual-train dataset](https://huggingface.co/datasets/llamaindex/vdr-multilingual-train)
```
